feat: datasets revamp (#527)
langchain-ai/langsmith-docs: docs/evaluation/how_to_guides/datasets/manage_datasets_in_application.mdx

  For the full list of available transformations, see [our reference](/reference/data_formats/dataset_transformations).

- **Create from template**: If you plan to collect production traces in your dataset from LangChain
  [ChatModels](https://python.langchain.com/docs/concepts/chat_models/)
  or from OpenAI calls using the [LangSmith OpenAI wrapper](/observability/how_to_guides/tracing/annotate_code#wrap-the-openai-client), we offer a prebuilt schema and transformation that stores examples in a format that is easy to use downstream. You can also customize the template settings to match your use case.

  Please see the [dataset transformations reference](/reference/data_formats/dataset_transformations) for more information.

  :::note
  Users who keep their prompt in their system message often prefer to add the `Remove System Messages` transformation to
  their dataset in addition to the default ones added by the template. This prevents the Sytem prompt, which is often
  what people want to evaluate, from entering the dataset.

## Add runs to your dataset in the UI

There are a few ways to add examples to your dataset in UI.

> ### Add run(s) from the tracing project UI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Add runs from the tracing project UI
```

> We typically construct datasets over time by collecting representative examples from debugging or other runs. To do this, we first filter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A common pattern for constructing datasets is to simply use the application and convert interesting traces into dataset examples. To do this, we first filter
```

> The easiest way to interact with datasets is directly in the LangSmith app. Here, you can create and edit datasets and example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The easiest way to interact with datasets is directly in the LangSmith app. Here, you can create and edit datasets and examples.
```

## Set up your dataset 

To create a dataset, head to the Datasets & Experiments page in LangSmith, and click `+ Dataset`. You'll have 3 options for
getting started:

> TODO: INSERT IMAGE WHEN COPY FINAL

Reviewer: update?

* **Create from CSV:** Drag and drop your CSV into LangSmith and your data will be imported automatically. Each row will correspond to a new dataset example.

> * **Create from scratch:** If you prefer to upload data from the SDK or manually, you can instead set up your dataset before seeding any data. 

Reviewer: whats "or manually" mean? is that like adding one example at a time in UI?

```suggestion
* **Create from scratch:** You can also create a dataset first and add examples later.
```

   LangSmith datasets store arbitrary JSON objects. We recommend (but do not require) that you define a schema for your dataset.
   Dataset schemas are defined with standard [JSON schema](https://json-schema.org/), with the addition of a few [custom types](/reference/data_formats/dataset_json_types) 

>    that make it easier to define commonly used LLM data primitives like messages and tool definitions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   that make it easier to type common primitives like messages and tools.
```

>    As part of your schema definition, certain fields allow you to click `+ Transformations` which enable common
>    preprocessing on your data to occur when you add examples to your dataset, such as converting LangSmith traces 
>    into standard openAI message formats, or dropping fields that aren't defined in your schema. For the full list 
>    of available transformations, see [our reference](/reference/data_formats/dataset_transformations)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Certain fields have a `+ Transformations` option. 
  Transformations are preprocessing steps that, if enabled, update your examples when you add them to the dataset.
  For example the `OpenAI messages transformation` will convert message-like objects, like LangChain messages, to OpenAI message format.
  For the full list of available transformations, see [our reference](/reference/data_formats/dataset_transformations).
```

* **Create from template**: If you plan to collect production traces in your dataset from LangChain 
[ChatModels](https://python.langchain.com/api_reference/core/language_models/langchain_core.language_models.chat_models.BaseChatModel.html) 

> or from OpenAI calls using the [LangSmith OpenAI wrapper](/observability/how_to_guides/tracing/annotate_code#wrap-the-openai-client), we offer a prebuilt schema and transformation that makes it easy to
> collect these runs in format that is easy to use downstream. This is entirely customizable, and does not lock your dataset into a set format. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or from OpenAI calls using the [LangSmith OpenAI wrapper](/observability/how_to_guides/tracing/annotate_code#wrap-the-openai-client), we offer a prebuilt schema and transformation that stores examples in a format that is easy to use downstream. You can also customize the template settings to match your use case.
```

>    Please see the [dataset transformations reference](/reference/data_formats/dataset_transformations) for more information. 

Reviewer: would be great (now or as follow up) to add transformations to concepts and link to that instead

   
   :::note
   Users who keep their prompt in their system message often prefer to add the `Remove System Messages` transformation to 
   their dataset in addition to the default ones added by the template. This prevents the Sytem prompt, which is often 
   what people want to evaluate, from entering the dataset. 

## Add runs to your dataset in the UI

There are a few ways to add examples to your dataset in UI. 

### Add run(s) from the tracing project UI
We typically construct datasets over time by collecting representative examples from debugging or other runs. To do this, we first filter the traces to find the ones we want to add to the dataset. Then we add the inputs and outputs from these traces to the dataset.

:::tip
An extremely powerful technique to build datasets is to drill-down into the most interesting traces, such as traces that were tagged with poor user feedback, and add them to a dataset.
For tips on how to filter traces, see the [filtering traces](../../../observability/how_to_guides/monitoring/filter_traces_in_application) guide.
:::

> There are two ways to add data from tracing projects to datasets. When runs are added from tracing projects to 

Reviewer: these two sentences dont feel like they should be next to each other. maybe second should be in the first para?

datasets, the inputs, outputs, and metadata of the run all carry over to the example in the dataset.

The first way is to multi-select runs from the runs table:

![](./static/multiselect_add_to_dataset.png)

The second is to navigate to the run details page and click `Add to -> Dataset` on the top right corner:

![](./static/add_to..dataset.png)

When you select the proper dataset from the run details page (this one using transformations to optimize for collecting LLM runs), 
a modal will pop up letting you know if any transformations were applied / if schema validation failed. You can then optionally edit 
the run before adding it to the dataset. 

![](./static/confirmation.png)

> ### Set up an automation to add a subset of all runs in a tracing project to a dataset

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Automatically add runs to a dataset
```

You can use [run rules](../../../observability/how_to_guides/monitoring/rules) to automatically add traces to a dataset based on certain conditions. For example, you could add all traces that have a certain tag to a dataset.

> Note you can also set up rules to add runs that meet criteria to an annotation queue, and then follow the guide below for adding from annotation queues.
> 
> ### Add run(s) from an annotation queue

Reviewer: would put note below the header
```suggestion
### Add runs from an annotation queue

You can also set up rules to add runs to annotation queues. Once runs are in an annotation queue, anyone can comment on, edit, and approve them to be added a a dataset(s). Annotation queues can be configured with default datasets, or you can choose which dataset to add each example to using the dataset switcher at the bottom of the screen. Once you ...
```

Annotation queues are configured optionally with a default dataset, though they allow you to add runs to any dataset 
by simply pressing the dataset switcher on the bottom of the screen. Once you select the right dataset, you click `Add to Dataset` 
or hit the hot key `D` to add the run to it. 

![](./static/add_to_dataset_from_aq.png)

> As with adding directly from the run details page, any modifications you make to the run in your annotation queue will carry over to 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any modifications you make to the run in your annotation queue will carry over to 
```

the dataset, and all metadata associated with the run will also be copied.

### Add runs directly via the Datasets UI

Go to the Datasets & Experiments UI, click the `Examples` tab, and `+ Example`. This will let you either define 
JSON inline

### Add synthetic examples created by an LLM via the Datasets UI

> If you have a schema defined on your dataset, when clicking `+ Example` as in the previous section, you can decide to generate examples instead of manually input them. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have a schema defined on your dataset, when you click `+ Example` you'll see an option to `Generate examples`. This will use an LLM to create synthetic examples.
```
